_sources/sort/index.rst, before:

..  Copyright (C)  Dave Parillo.  Permission is granted to copy, distribute
    and/or modify this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation
    License, Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software
    Foundation; with Invariant Sections being Forward, and Preface,
    no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of
    the license is included in the section entitled "GNU Free Documentation
    License".

..  Copyright (C)  Brad Miller, David Ranum, and Jan Pearce
    This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/.

Sorting
=======

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   bubble.rst
   selection.rst
   insertion.rst
   shell.rst
   merge.rst
   quick.rst
   heap.rst
   radix.rst
   summary.rst

**Sorting** is the process of placing elements from a collection in some
kind of order. For example, a list of words could be sorted
alphabetically or by length. A list of cities could be sorted by
population, by area, or by zip code. We have already seen a number of
algorithms that were able to benefit from having a sorted list (recall
the final anagram example and the binary search).

There are many, many sorting algorithms that have been developed and
analyzed. This suggests that sorting is an important area of study in
computer science. Sorting a large number of items can take a substantial
amount of computing resources. Like searching, the efficiency of a
sorting algorithm is related to the number of items being processed. For
small collections, a complex sorting method may be more trouble than it's
worth. The overhead may be too high. On the other hand, for larger
collections, we want to take advantage of as many improvements as
possible. In this section we will discuss several sorting techniques and
compare them with respect to their running time.

Before getting into specific algorithms, we should think about the
operations that can be used to analyze a sorting process. First, it will
be necessary to compare two values to see which is smaller (or larger).
In order to sort a collection, it will be necessary to have some
systematic way to compare values to see if they are out of order. The
total number of comparisons will be the most common way to measure a
sort procedure. Second, when values are not in the correct position with
respect to one another, it may be necessary to exchange them. This
exchange is a costly operation and the total number of exchanges will
also be important for evaluating the overall efficiency of the
algorithm.

Commit message:

finish draft chapter 1. add some intro text to each chapter

_sources/sort/index.rst, after:

..  Copyright (C)  Dave Parillo.  Permission is granted to copy, distribute
    and/or modify this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation
    License, Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software
    Foundation; with Invariant Sections being Forward, and Preface,
    no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of
    the license is included in the section entitled "GNU Free Documentation
    License".

..  Copyright (C)  Brad Miller, David Ranum, and Jan Pearce
    This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/.

Sorting
=======
**Sorting** is the process of placing elements from a collection in some
kind of order. For example, a list of words could be sorted
alphabetically or by length. A list of cities could be sorted by
population, by area, or by zip code. We have already seen a number of
algorithms that were able to benefit from having a sorted list (recall
the final anagram example and the binary search).

This chapter introduces several sorting algorithms and their trade-offs.
This chapter refers to relative algorithm performance,
so reviewing the chapter on :doc:`analysis <../analysis/index>` may help.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   bubble.rst
   selection.rst
   insertion.rst
   shell.rst
   merge.rst
   quick.rst
   heap.rst
   radix.rst
   summary.rst

There are many, many sorting algorithms that have been developed and
analyzed. This suggests that sorting is an important area of study in
computer science. Sorting a large number of items can take a substantial
amount of computing resources. Like searching, the efficiency of a
sorting algorithm is related to the number of items being processed. For
small collections, a complex sorting method may be more trouble than it's
worth. The overhead may be too high. On the other hand, for larger
collections, we want to take advantage of as many improvements as
possible. In this section we will discuss several sorting techniques and
compare them with respect to their running time.

Before getting into specific algorithms, we should think about the
operations that can be used to analyze a sorting process. First, it will
be necessary to compare two values to see which is smaller (or larger).
In order to sort a collection, it will be necessary to have some
systematic way to compare values to see if they are out of order. The
total number of comparisons will be the most common way to measure a
sort procedure. Second, when values are not in the correct position with
respect to one another, it may be necessary to exchange them. This
exchange is a costly operation and the total number of exchanges will
also be important for evaluating the overall efficiency of the
algorithm.
